Boxes update (#236)
CQCL/pytket: manual/manual_circuit.rst

    print("T gate count =", circ.n_gates_of_type(OpType.T))
    print("#1qb gates =", circ.n_1qb_gates())
    print("#2qb gates =", circ.n_2qb_gates())
    print("#3qb gates =", circ.n_nqb_gates(3)) # count the single CnRy gate (n=3)
    print("T gate depth =", circ.depth_by_type(OpType.T))
    print("2qb gate depth =", circ.depth_by_type({OpType.CX, OpType.CZ}))

.. note:: Each of these metrics will analyse the :py:class:`Circuit` "as is", so they will consider each Box as a single unit rather than breaking it down into basic gates, nor will they perform any non-trivial gate commutations (those that don't just follow by deformation of the DAG) or gate decompositions (e.g. recognising that a :math:`CZ` gate would contribute 1 to :math:`CX`-count in practice).

Boxes
-----

Working with individual basic gates is sufficient for implementing arbitrary circuits, but that doesn't mean it is the most convenient option. It is generally far easier to argue the correctness of a circuit's design when it is constructed using higher-level constructions. In ``pytket``, the concept of a "Box" is to abstract away such complex structures as black-boxes within larger circuits.

> Circuit Boxes and Controlled Unitaries

Reviewer: Seems a bit odd to group these together, why not make separate sections? Also "controlled unitaries" isn't the best description for a `QControlBox` since the constructor takes an `Op`, not a unitary.

Author: Out of curiosity is it even possible to construct a controlled non-unitary operation in pytket? The manual says the following...

```
If our subcircuit is a pure quantum circuit (i.e. it corresponds to a unitary operation), we can construct the controlled version that is applied coherently according to some set of control qubits.
```

Reviewer: No it's not possible. (I'm not even sure what it would mean, but there may be a way to make sense of it e.g. using density matrices?)

======================================

.. Boxes abstract away complex structures as black-box units within larger circuits

.. Simplest case is the `CircBox`

The simplest example of this is a :py:class:`CircBox`, which wraps up another :py:class:`Circuit` defined elsewhere into a single black-box. The difference between adding a :py:class:`CircBox` and just appending the :py:class:`Circuit` is that the :py:class:`CircBox` allows us to wrap up and abstract away the internal structure of the subcircuit we are adding so it appears as if it were a single gate when we view the main :py:class:`Circuit`.

> Lets first build a basic quantum circuit which implements a simplified version of a Grover oracle and then add

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's first build a basic quantum circuit which implements a simplified version of a Grover oracle and then add
```

Author: Done, apologies for the frequent grammatical errors it seems the spell checker on my IDE was only partially enabled.

Let's first build a basic quantum circuit which implements a simplified version of a Grover oracle and then add
it to another circuit as part of a larger algorithm.

.. jupyter-execute::

    from pytket.circuit import Circuit, OpType
    from pytket.circuit.display import render_circuit_jupyter

    oracle_circ = Circuit(3, name="Oracle")
    oracle_circ.X(0)
    oracle_circ.X(1)
    oracle_circ.X(2)
    oracle_circ.add_gate(OpType.CnZ, [0, 1, 2])
    oracle_circ.X(0)
    oracle_circ.X(1)
    oracle_circ.X(2)

    render_circuit_jupyter(oracle_circ)

Now that we've built our circuit we can wrap it up in a :py:class:`CircBox` and add it to a another circuit as a subroutine.

.. jupyter-execute::

    from pytket.circuit import CircBox

    oracle_box = CircBox(oracle_circ)
    circ = Circuit(3)
    circ.H(0).H(1).H(2)
    circ.add_circbox(oracle_box, [0, 1, 2])

    render_circuit_jupyter(circ)

> See how the name circuit appears in the rendered circuit diagram. Clicking on the box will show the underlying circuit.

Author: thanks, done

.. Capture unitaries via `Unitary1qBox` and `Unitary2qBox`

> Boxes for Unitary synthesis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Boxes for Unitary Synthesis
```
(assuming we're using Title Case throughout).

    circ.add_unitary1qbox(u1box, 2)
    circ.add_unitary2qbox(u2box, 1, 0)

> .. note:: For performance reasons pytket currently only supports unitary synthesis up to three qubits. Three-qubit synthesis can be accomplished with :py:class:`Unitary3qBox` using the same syntax as above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note:: For performance reasons pytket currently only supports unitary synthesis up to three qubits. Three-qubit synthesis can be accomplished with :py:class:`Unitary3qBox` using a similar syntax.
```

.. `PauliExpBox` for simulations and general interactions

Also in this category of synthesis boxes is :py:class:`DiagonalBox`. This allows synthesis of circuits for diagonal unitaries. 
This box can be constructed by passing in a :math:`(1 \times 2^n)` numpy array representing the diagonal entries of the desired unitary matrix.

Pauli Exponential Boxes and Phase Polynommials
==============================================

> Another notable example that is common to many algorithms and high-level circuit descriptions is the exponential of a Pauli tensor: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another notable construct that is common to many algorithms and high-level circuit descriptions is the exponential of a Pauli tensor: 
```

.. math::
    
    \begin{equation}
    e^{-i \frac{\pi}{2} \theta P}\,, \quad P \in \{I, X, Y, Z\}^{\otimes n}
    \end{equation} 

These occur very naturally in Trotterising evolution operators and sometimes as native device operations.

.. jupyter-execute::

    from pytket.circuit import PauliExpBox
    from pytket.pauli import Pauli

    # Construct PauliExpBox(es) with a list of Paulis followed by the phase
    xyyz = PauliExpBox([Pauli.X, Pauli.Y, Pauli.Y, Pauli.Z], -0.2)
    zzyx = PauliExpBox([Pauli.Z, Pauli.Z, Pauli.Y, Pauli.X], 0.7)

    pauli_circ = Circuit(5)

    pauli_circ.add_pauliexpbox(xyyz, [0, 1, 2, 3])
    pauli_circ.add_pauliexpbox(zzyx, [1, 2, 3, 4])

> To understand what happens inside a :py:class:`PauliExpBox` lets take a look at the underlying circuit for :math:`e^{-i \frac{\pi}{2}\theta ZZYX}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand what happens inside a :py:class:`PauliExpBox` let's take a look at the underlying circuit for :math:`e^{-i \frac{\pi}{2}\theta ZZYX}`
```

Reviewer: Yes, see the definition of `PauliExpBox` in https://cqcl.github.io/tket/pytket/api/optype.html#pytket.circuit.OpType .

.. jupyter-execute::

    render_circuit_jupyter(zzyx.get_circuit())

> All Pauli Exponetials of the form above can be implemented in terms of a single Rz(:math:`\theta`) rotation and a symmetric chain of CX gates on either side together with some single qubit basis rotations. This class of circuit is called a Pauli Gadget. The subset of these circuits corresponding to "Z only" Pauli strings are referred to as phase gadgets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All Pauli exponentials of the form above can be implemented in terms of a single Rz(:math:`\theta`) rotation and a symmetric chain of CX gates on either side together with some single-qubit basis rotations. This class of circuit is called a Pauli gadget. The subset of these circuits corresponding to "Z only" Pauli strings are referred to as phase gadgets.
```

Author: done

We see that the Pauli exponential :math:`e^{i\frac{\pi}{2} \theta \text{ZZYX}}` has basis rotations on the third and fourth qubit. The V and Vdg gates rotate from the default Z basis to the Y basis and the Hadamard gate serves to change to the X basis.

These Pauli gadget circuits have interesting algebraic properties which are useful for circuit optimisation. For instance Pauli gadgets are unitarily invariant under the permutation of their qubits. For further discussion see the research publication on phase gadget synthesis [Cowt2020]_. Ideas from this paper are implemented in TKET as the `OptimisePhaseGadgets <https://cqcl.github.io/tket/pytket/api/passes.html#pytket.passes.OptimisePhaseGadgets>`_ and `PauliSimp <https://cqcl.github.io/tket/pytket/api/passes.html#pytket.passes.PauliSimp>`_ optimisation passes.

Phase polynomial circuits are a special class of circuits that use the {CX, Rz} gateset.

A phase polynomial :math:`p(x)` is defined as as a linear combination of Boolean linear functions :math:`f_i(x)`

.. math::

    \begin{equation}
    p(x) = \sum_{i=1}^{2^n} \theta_i f_i(x)
    \end{equation}

> A phase polynomial circuit is a circuit which has the following action on computational basis states :math:`|x\rangle`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A phase polynomial circuit is a circuit which has the following action on computational basis states :math:`|x\rangle`:
```

Author: Done

.. math::

    \begin{equation}
    |x\rangle \longmapsto e^{2\pi i p(x)}|g(x)\rangle
    \end{equation}

> A phase polynomial circuit can be synthesisied in pytket using the :py:class:`PhasePolyBox`. The :py:class:`PhasePolyBox` is constructed using the number of qubits, qubit indices as well as a dictionary indicating whether or not a phase should be applied to specific qubits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A phase polynomial circuit can be synthesisied in pytket using the :py:class:`PhasePolyBox`. The :py:class:`PhasePolyBox` is constructed using the number of qubits, the qubit indices, and a dictionary indicating whether or not a phase should be applied to specific qubits.
```

Author: Done

> Finally a ``linear_transfromation`` parameter needs to be specified  which is a matrix encoding the linear permutation between the bitsrings :math:`|x\rangle` and :math:`|g(x)\rangle` in the equation above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally a ``linear_transformation`` parameter needs to be specified: this is a matrix encoding the linear permutation between the bitstrings :math:`|x\rangle` and :math:`|g(x)\rangle` in the equation above.
```

Author: Done

.. jupyter-execute::

    from pytket.circuit import PhasePolyBox

    phase_poly_circ = Circuit(3)

    qubit_indices = {Qubit(0): 0, Qubit(1): 1, Qubit(2): 2}

    phase_polynomial = {
        (True, False, True): 0.333,
        (False, False, True): 0.05,
        (False, True, False): 1.05,
    }

    n_qb = 3

    linear_transformation = np.array([[1, 1, 0], [0, 1, 0], [0, 0, 1]])

    p_box = PhasePolyBox(n_qb, qubit_indices, phase_polynomial, linear_transformation)

    phase_poly_circ.add_phasepolybox(p_box, [0, 1, 2])

    render_circuit_jupyter(p_box.get_circuit())

Multiplexors, State Preperation Boxes and :py:class:`ToffoliBox`
================================================================

In the context of quantum circuits a multiplexor is type of generalised multicontrolled gate. Multiplexors grant us the flexibility to specify different operations on target qubits for different control states.
To create a multiplexor we simply construct a dictionary where the keys are the state of the control qubits and the values represent the operation performed on the target.

> Lets implement a multiplexor with the following logic. Here we treat the first two qubits a controls and the third qubit as the target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lets implement a multiplexor with the following logic. Here we treat the first two qubits as controls and the third qubit as the target.
```

Author: done

if control qubits in :math:`|00\rangle`:
    do Rz(0.3) on third qubit
else if control qubits in :math:`|11\rangle`:
     do H on third qubit
else:
    do identity (i.e. do nothing)

.. jupyter-execute::

    from pytket.circuit import Op, MultiplexorBox

    # Define both gates as an Op
    rz_op = Op.create(OpType.Rz, 0.3)
    h_op = Op.create(OpType.H)

    op_map = {(0, 0): rz_op, (1, 1): h_op}
    multiplexor = MultiplexorBox(op_map)

    multi_circ = Circuit(3)
    multi_circ.X(0).X(1)  # Put both control qubits in the state |1>
    multi_circ.add_multiplexor(multiplexor, [Qubit(0), Qubit(1), Qubit(2)])

    render_circuit_jupyter(multi_circ)

Notice how in the example above the control qubits are both in the :math:`|1\rangle` state and so the multiplexor applies the Hadamard operation to the third qubit. If we calculate our statevector we see that the third qubit is in the 
:math:`|+\rangle = H|0\rangle` state.

.. jupyter-execute::

    # Assume all qubits initialised to |0> here
    print("Statevector =", multi_circ.get_statevector())  # amplitudes of |+> approx 0.707...

> In addition to the general :py:class:`Multiplexor` pytket has several other type of Multiplexor box operations available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the general :py:class:`Multiplexor` pytket has several other type of multiplexor box operations available.
```

======================================= =================================================
Multiplexor                             Description
======================================= =================================================
:py:class:`MultiplexorBox`              The most general type of multiplexor (see above)
                               
:py:class:`MultiplexedRotationBox`      Multiplexor where the operation applied to the 
                                        target is a rotation gate about a single axis
                                        
:py:class:`MultiplexedU2Box`            Multiplexor for unifromly controlled single
                                        qubit gates (U(2) operations)

:py:class:`MultiplexedTensoredU2Box`    Multiplexor where the operation applied to the
                                        target is a tensor product of single qubit gates
                                                                       
======================================= =================================================

One place where multiplexor operations are useful is in state preparation algorithms.

> TKET supports the preperation of arbitrary quantum states via the :py:class:`StatePreparationBox`. This box takes a  :math:`(1\times 2^n)` numpy array representing the :math:`n` qubit statevector where the entries represent the amplitudes of the quantum state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TKET supports the preparation of arbitrary quantum states via the :py:class:`StatePreparationBox`. This box takes a  :math:`(1\times 2^n)` numpy array representing the :math:`n` qubit statevector where the entries represent the amplitudes of the quantum state.
```

Author: Done

Given the vector of amplitudes TKET will construct a box containing a sequence of multiplexors using the method outlined in [Shen2004]_.

To demonstrate :py:class:`StatePreparationBox` let's use it to prepare the Werner state :math:`|W\rangle`.

.. math::

    \begin{equation}
    |W\rangle = \frac{1}{\sqrt{3}} \big(|001\rangle + |010\rangle + |100\rangle \big)
    \end{equation}

.. jupyter-execute::

    from pytket.circuit import StatePreparationBox

    werner_state = 1 / np.sqrt(3) * np.array([0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0])

    werner_state_box = StatePreparationBox(werner_state)

    state_circ = Circuit(3)
    state_circ.add_state_preparation_box(werner_state_box, [Qubit(0), Qubit(1), Qubit(2)])

.. jupyter-execute::

    # Verify state preperation
    np.round(state_circ.get_statevector().real, 3)

> Note that generic state preperation circuits can be very complex with the gatecount and depth increasing rapidly with the size of the state. In the special case where the desired state has only real valued amplitudes only multiplexed Ry operations are needed to accomplish the state prepartion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that generic state preparation circuits can be very complex with the gatecount and depth increasing rapidly with the size of the state. In the special case where the desired state has only real-valued amplitudes, only multiplexed Ry operations are needed to accomplish the state preparation.
```

Author: Done

> Finally lets consider another box type namely the :py:class:`ToffoliBox`. This box can be used to prepare an arbitary permutation of the computational basis states.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally let's consider another box type, namely the :py:class:`ToffoliBox`. This box can be used to prepare an arbitrary permutation of the computational basis states.
```

Author: Done

> To construct the box we need to specify the permuation as a key:value pair where the key is the input basis state and the value is output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To construct the box we need to specify the permutation as a key-value pair where the key is the input basis state and the value is output.
```

Author: done

> Lets construct a :py:class:`ToffoliBox` to perform the following mapping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's construct a :py:class:`ToffoliBox` to perform the following mapping:
```

.. math::

    \begin{gather}
    |001\rangle \longmapsto |111\rangle \\
    |111\rangle \longmapsto |001\rangle \\
    |100\rangle \longmapsto |000\rangle \\
    |000\rangle \longmapsto |100\rangle
    \end{gather}

> We can construct a :py:class:`ToffoliBox` with a python dictionary where the basis states above are entered as key:value pairs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can construct a :py:class:`ToffoliBox` with a python dictionary where the basis states above are entered as key-value pairs.
```

Author: done

> For correctness if a basis state appears as key in the permutation dictionary then it must also appear and a value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For correctness if a basis state appears as key in the permutation dictionary then it must also appear and a value.
```

.. jupyter-execute::

    from pytket.circuit import ToffoliBox

    # Specify the desired permutation of the basis states
    mapping = {
        (0, 0, 1): (1, 1, 1),
        (1, 1, 1): (0, 0, 1),
        (1, 0, 0): (0, 0, 0),
        (0, 0, 0): (1, 0, 0),
    }

    # Define box to perform the permutation
    perm_box = ToffoliBox(permutation=mapping)

The permutation is implemented efficently using a sequence of multiplexed rotations followed by a :py:class:`DiagonalBox`.

.. jupyter-execute::

    render_circuit_jupyter(perm_box.get_circuit())

> Finally lets append the :py:class:`ToffoliBox` onto our circuit preparing our Werner state to perform the permutation of basis states specifed above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally let's append the :py:class:`ToffoliBox` onto our circuit preparing our Werner state to perform the permutation of basis states specified above.
```

Author: done

    op = Op.create(OpType.S)
    ccs = QControlBox(op, 2)

In addition, we can construct a :py:class:`QControlBox` from any other pure quantum box type in pytket. 

> We can construct a multicontrolled :math:`\sqrt{Y}` operation as by first synthesising the base unitary with :py:class:`Unitary1qBox` and then constructing a :py:class:`QControlBox` from the box implementing :math:`\sqrt{Y}`. 

Author: done

Pauli Exponential Boxes and Phase Polynommials
==============================================

Another notable construct that is common to many algorithms and high-level circuit descriptions is the exponential of a Pauli tensor: 

.. math::
    
    \begin{equation}
    e^{-i \frac{\pi}{2} \theta P}\,, \quad P \in \{I, X, Y, Z\}^{\otimes n}
    \end{equation} 

These occur very naturally in Trotterising evolution operators and native device operations.

.. jupyter-execute::

    from pytket.circuit import PauliExpBox
    from pytket.pauli import Pauli

    # Construct PauliExpBox(es) with a list of Paulis followed by the phase
    xyyz = PauliExpBox([Pauli.X, Pauli.Y, Pauli.Y, Pauli.Z], -0.2)
    zzyx = PauliExpBox([Pauli.Z, Pauli.Z, Pauli.Y, Pauli.X], 0.7)

    pauli_circ = Circuit(5)

    pauli_circ.add_pauliexpbox(xyyz, [0, 1, 2, 3])
    pauli_circ.add_pauliexpbox(zzyx, [1, 2, 3, 4])

To understand what happens inside a :py:class:`PauliExpBox` let's take a look at the underlying circuit for :math:`e^{-i \frac{\pi}{2}\theta ZZYX}`

.. jupyter-execute::

    render_circuit_jupyter(zzyx.get_circuit())

> All Pauli exponetials of the form above can be implemented in terms of a single Rz(:math:`\theta`) rotation and a symmetric chain of CX gates on either side together with some single qubit basis rotations. This class of circuit is called a Pauli gadget. The subset of these circuits corresponding to "Z only" Pauli strings are referred to as phase gadgets.

Author: done

To construct the box we need to specify the permutation as a key-value pair where the key is the input basis state and the value is output.
Let's construct a :py:class:`ToffoliBox` to perform the following mapping:

.. math::

    \begin{gather}
    |001\rangle \longmapsto |111\rangle \\
    |111\rangle \longmapsto |001\rangle \\
    |100\rangle \longmapsto |000\rangle \\
    |000\rangle \longmapsto |100\rangle
    \end{gather}

We can construct a :py:class:`ToffoliBox` with a python dictionary where the basis states above are entered as key-value pairs.
For correctness if a basis state appears as key in the permutation dictionary then it must also appear and a value.

.. jupyter-execute::

    from pytket.circuit import ToffoliBox

    # Specify the desired permutation of the basis states
    mapping = {
        (0, 0, 1): (1, 1, 1),
        (1, 1, 1): (0, 0, 1),
        (1, 0, 0): (0, 0, 0),
        (0, 0, 0): (1, 0, 0),
    }

    # Define box to perform the permutation
    perm_box = ToffoliBox(permutation=mapping)

> This permutation of basis states can be achieved with purely classical operations {X, CnX} hence the name :py:class:`ToffoliBox`.

Author: Yes I suppose CCX would be clearer. 

I have heard Toffoli used refer to gates with more than 2 controls though. Before Yao's recent change the gates used to implement a `ToffoliBox` were {X, CnX}
